Accounts db replication design proposal (#18651)
solana-labs/solana: docs/src/proposals/accounts-db-replication.md

its main validator for new slots and requests the validator to send the updated
accounts for that slot and update to its own AccountsDb.

The same RPC replication mechanism can be used between a replica to another replica.
This requires the replica to serve both the client and server in the replication model.

On the client RPC serving side, `JsonRpcAccountsService` is responsible for serving
the client RPC calls for accounts related information similar to the existing
`JsonRpcService`.

The replica will also take snapshots periodically so that it can start quickly after
a restart if the snapshot is not too old.

## Detailed Solution
The following sections provide more details of the design.

### Consistency Model
The AccountsDb information is replicated asynchronously from the main validator to the replica.
When a query against the replica's AccountsDb is made, the replica may not have the latest
information of the latest slot. In this regard, it will eventually be consistent. However, for
a particular slot, the information provided is consistent with that of its peer validator
for commitment levels confirmed and finalized. For V1, we only support queries at these two
levels.

> ### Solana RPC Node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Solana Replica Node
```

It will be a separate executable from the validator.

The replica consists of the following major components:

The `ReplicaUpdatedSlotsRequestor`: this service is responsible for periodically sending the
request `ReplicaUpdatedSlotsRequest` to its peer validator or replica for the latest slots.
It specifies the latest slot (last_replicated_slot) for which the replica has already
fetched the accounts information for. This maintains the ReplWorkingSlotSet and manages
the lifecycle of BankForks, BlockCommitmentCache (for the highest confirmed slot) and
the optimistically confirmed bank.

The `ReplicaUpdatedSlotsServer`: this service is responsible for serving the
`ReplicaUpdatedSlotsRequest` and sends the `ReplicaUpdatedSlotsResponse` back to the requestor.
The response consists of a vector of new slots the validator knows of which is later than the
specified last_replicated_slot. This service also runs in the main validator. This service
gets the slots for replication from the BankForks, BlockCommitmentCache and OptimiscallyConfirmBank.

The `ReplicaAccountsRequestor`: this service is responsible for sending the request

> `ReplicaAccountsRequest` to its peer validator or replica for the `ReplAccountInfo` for a
> slot for which it has not completed accounts db replication. The `ReplAccountInfo` contains
> the `ReplAccountMeta`, Hash and the AccountData. The `ReplAccountMeta` contains info about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ReplicaAccountsRequest` to its peer validator or replica for the `ReplicaAccountInfo` for a
slot for which it has not completed accounts db replication. The `ReplicaAccountInfo` contains
the `ReplicaAccountMeta`, Hash and the AccountData. The `ReplicaAccountMeta` contains info about
```

ReplAccountInfo and the vector of ReplAccountInfo. This service runs both in the validator
and the replica relaying replication information. The server can stream the account information
from its AccountCache or from the storage if already flushed. This is similar to how a snapshot
package is created from the AccountsDb with the difference that the storage does not need to be
flushed to the disk before streaming to the client. If the account data is in the cache, it can
be directly streamed. Care must be taken to avoid account data for a slot being cleaned while
serving the streaming. When attempting a replication of a slot, if the slot is already cleaned
up with accounts data cleaned as result of update in later rooted slots, the replica should
forsake this slot and try the later uncleaned root slot.

During replication we also need to replicate the information of accounts
that have been cleaned up due to zero lamports, i.e. we need to be able to tell the difference
between an account in a given slot which was not updated and hence has no storage entry in that slot, and one that holds 0 lamports and has been cleaned up through the history. We may record this via

> some "Tombstone" mechanism -- recording the dead accounts cleaned up fora slot. The tombstones themselves can be removed after exceeding the retention period expressed as epochs. Any attempt to replicate slots with tombstones removed will fail and the replica should skip this slot and try later ones.

Reviewer: Wrap lines?

Author: done

accounts for that slot and update to its own AccountsDb.

The same RPC replication mechansim can be used between a replica to another replica.
This requires the replica to serve both the client and server in the replication model.

On the client RPC serving side, `JsonRpcAccountsService` is responsible for serving
the client RPC calls for accounts related information similar to the existing
`JsonRpcService`.

The replica will also take snapshots periodically so that it can start quickly after
a restart if the snapshot is not too old.

## Detailed Solution
The following sections provides more details of the design.

### Consistency Model
The AccountsDb information is replicated asynchronously from the main validator to the replica.
When a query against the replica's AccountsDb is made, the replica may not have the latest
information of the latest slot. In this regard, it will be eventually consistent. However, for
a particular slot, the information provided is consistent with the that of its peer validator
for commitment levels confirmed and finalized. For V1, we only support queries at these two
levels.

### Solana RPC Node

> A new node named solana-rpc-node will be introduced whose main responsibility is to maintain

Reviewer: I tend to think `solana-rpc-node` is a little too generic. Perhaps `solana-accounts-replica-node`?

Author: Agreed on solana-rpc-node is a little too generic. solana-accounts-replica-node is a little too wordy with 4 words. How about solana-replica-node this keep it opens for other replications in the future.

the AccountsDb replica. The RPC node or replica node is used interchangebly in this document.
It will be a separate exectuable from the validator.

> The replica consists of the following major components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The replica consists of the following major components:
```

Author: Done

> The `ReplRpcUpdatedSlotsRequestor`, this service is responsible for peridically sending the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ReplRpcUpdatedSlotsRequestor`: this service is responsible for periodically sending the
```

Reviewer: Also, let's spell out "replica". Do we need Rpc?
```suggestion
The `ReplicaUpdatedSlotsRequestor`, this service is responsible for peridically sending the
```

Same suggestion for all following service, request, and struct names below

Author: Done

request `ReplRpcUpdatedSlotsRequest` to its peer validator or replica for the latest slots.
It specifies the latest slot (last_replicated_slot) for which the replica has already
fetched the accounts information for. This maintains the ReplWorkingSlotSet and manages
the lifecycle of BankForks, BlockCommitmentCache (for the highest confirmed slot) and
the optimistically confirmed bank.

The `ReplRpcUpdatedSlotsServer`, this service is responsible for serving the
`ReplRpcUpdatedSlotsRequest` and sends the `ReplRpcUpdatedSlotsResponse` back to the requestor.
The response consists of a vector of new slots the validator knows of which is later than the

> specified last_replicated_slot. This services also runs in the main validator. This service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specified last_replicated_slot. This service also runs in the main validator. This service
```

Author: Done

The `ReplRpcAccountsRequestor`, this service is responsible for sending the request
`ReplRpcAccountsRequest` to its peer validator or replica for the `ReplAccountInfo` for a
slot for which it has not completed accounts db replication. The `ReplAccountInfo` contains
the `ReplAccountMeta`, Hash and the AccountData. The `ReplAccountMeta` contains info about
the existing `AccountMeta` in addition to the account data length in bytes.

The `ReplRpcAccountsServer`, this service is reponsible for serving the `ReplRpcAccountsRequest`
and sends `ReplRpcAccountsResponse` to the requestor. The response contains the count of the
ReplAccountInfo and the vector of ReplAccountInfo. This service runs both in the validator
and the replica relaying replication information. The server can stream the account information
from its AccountCache or from the storage if already flushed. This is similar to how a snapshot
package is created from the AccountsDb with the difference that the storage does not need to be
flushed to the disk before streaming to the client. If the account data is in the cache, it can

> be directly streamed. Care must be taken to avoid the account data for a slot get cleaned while

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be directly streamed. Care must be taken to avoid account data for a slot being cleaned while
```

Author: Done Thanks

serving the streaming. When attempting a replication of a slot, if the slot is already cleaned
up with accounts data cleaned as result of update in later rooted slots, the replica should 
forsake this slot and try the later uncleaned root slot.

> During replication we also need to replicate the information of accounts
> who have been cleaned up due to zero lamports, i.e. we need to be able to tell the difference
> for the account in a given slot: it is not updated and hence no storage entry in that slot and
> the accounts have 0 lamports and have been cleaned up through the history. We may record this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During replication we also need to replicate the information of accounts
that have been cleaned up due to zero lamports, i.e. we need to be able to tell the difference
between an account in a given slot which was not updated and hence has no storage entry in that slot, and
tone that holds 0 lamports and has been cleaned up through the history. We may record this
```

Author: Done. Thanks

via some "Tombstone" mechanism -- recording the dead accounts cleaned up for a slot. The
tombstones themselves can be removed after exceeding retention period expressed as epochs.

> And attempt to replicate slots with tombstones removed will fail and the replica should skip

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any attempt to replicate slots with tombstones removed will fail and the replica should skip
```

Author: Fixed

this slot and try later ones.

The `JsonRpcAccountsService`, this is the RPC service serving client requests for account
information. The existing JsonRpcService serves other client calls than AccountsDb ones.
The replica node only serves the AccountsDb calls.

The existing JsonRpcService requires `BankForks`, `OptimisticallyConfirmedBank` and
`BlockCommitmentCache` to load the Bank. The JsonRpcAccountsService will need to use 
information obtained from ReplRpcUpdatedSlotsResponse to construct the AccountsDb. Question,

> do we still need the Bank in the replica?

Reviewer: Is this question still relevant?

Author: Removed

Reviewer: Missing a commit? Doesn't seem removed.

The `AccountsBackgroundService`, this service also runs in the replica which is responsible
for taking snapshots periodically and shrinking the AccountsDb and doing accounts cleaning.
The existing code also uses BankForks which we need to keep in the replica.

### Compatibility Consideration

For protocol compatiblilty considerations, all the requests have the replication version which is
initially set to 1. Alternatively, we can use the validator's version. The RPC server side
shall check the request version and fail if it is not supported.

### Replication Setup
To limit adverse effects on the validator and the replica due to replication, they can be configured
with a list of replica nodes which can form a replication pair with it. And the replica node is

> configured with the validator which can serve its requests.

Reviewer: This will just be one replica, right?

Author: Yes

Reviewer: Let's update this section to reflect that, then.

### Fault Tolerance
The main responsibility of making sure the replication is tolerant of faults lies with the replica.
In case of request failures, the replica shall retry the requests. 

> ### Interface

Reviewer: I've started to separate these methods in rpc, and I think we should actually have 3 lists:
- JsonRpcAccountsService-only APIs
- JsonRpcService-only APIs
- APIs supported by both

Currently, most of the APIs that only require a Bank are in the `included` list, but a few are not: getSlotLeader, getSlotLeaders, and getBlockProduction
There's no reason that all of these couldn't be supported by both replicas and full API nodes; none of them are particularly heavy. And there is likely existing `Processed` commitment use with some of them, like `getFees` and `getRecentBlockhash`

Reviewer: I'll push a PR shortly with rpc re-org along these lines and you can see what you think, @lijunwangs

Following are the client RPC APIs supported by the replica node in JsonRpcAccountsService.

- getAccountInfo
- getBlockCommitment
- getMultipleAccounts
- getProgramAccounts
- getMinimumBalanceForRentExemption
- getInflationGovenor
- getInflationRate
- getEpochSchedule
- getRecentBlockhash
- getFees
- getFeeCalculatorForBlockhash
- getFeeRateGovernor
- getLargestAccounts
- getSupply
- getStakeActivation
- getTokenAccountBalance
- getTokenSupply
- getTokenLargestAccounts
- getTokenAccountsByOwner
- getTokenAccountsByDelegate

Following APIs are not included:

- getInflationReward

> - getEpochSchedule

Reviewer: This is in the `included` list. Remove?

Author: Will do
